Section 2 Clinical Syndromes: 
Community-Acquired Infections
126
Pneumonia
Lionel A. Mandell, Michael S. 
Niederman
category has not reliably predicted infection with resistant patho
gens and has been associated with increased use of broad-spectrum 
antibiotics, particularly those employed for treatment of methicillin- 
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and antipseudomonal β-lactams. 
Accordingly, use of the HCAP category should be discontinued. Rather 
than relying on a predefined subset of pneumonia cases, it is better to 
assess patients individually on the basis of risk factors for infection 
with a resistant organism. Risk factors for infection with MRSA and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa include prior isolation of the organism, 
particularly from the respiratory tract during the preceding year, and/
or hospitalization and treatment with an antibiotic in the previous  
90 days.
Pneumonia caused by macroaspiration of oropharyngeal or gastric 
contents, usually referred to as aspiration pneumonia, is best thought 
of as a point on the continuum that includes CAP and HAP. Estimates 
suggest that aspiration pneumonia accounts for 5–15% of CAP cases, 
but reliable figures for HAP are unavailable. The airways or pulmonary 
parenchyma may be involved, and patients usually represent a clinical 
phenotype with risk factors for macroaspiration and involvement of 
characteristic anatomic pulmonary locations.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Pneumonia is the result of the proliferation of microbial pathogens 
at the alveolar level and the host’s response to them. Until recently, it  
was thought that the lungs were sterile and that pneumonia resulted 
from the introduction of potential pathogens into this sterile environ
ment. Typically, this introduction occurred through microaspiration of 
oropharyngeal organisms into the lower respiratory tract. Overcoming 
of innate and adaptive immunity by such microorganisms could result 
in the clinical syndrome of pneumonia.
Recent use of culture-independent techniques of microbial identifi
cation has demonstrated a complex and diverse community of bacteria 
in the lungs that constitutes the lung microbiota. Awareness of this 
microbiota has prompted a rethinking of how pneumonia develops. 
Mechanical factors, such as the hairs and turbinates of the nares, the 
branching tracheobronchial tree, mucociliary clearance, and gag and 
cough reflexes, all play a role in host defense but are insufficient to 
effectively block bacterial access to the lower airways. In the absence 
of a sufficient barrier, microorganisms may reach the lower respiratory 
tract by a variety of pathways, including inhalation, microaspiration, 
and direct mucosal dispersion.
The constitution of the lung microbiota is determined by three fac
tors: microbial entry into the lungs, microbial elimination, and regional 
growth conditions for bacteria, such as pH, oxygen tension, and tem
perature. The key question, however, is how a dynamic homeostasis 
among bacterial communities results in acute infection. Pneumonia 
therefore does not appear to be the result of the invasion of a sterile 
space by a particular microorganism but is more likely an emergent 
phenomenon dependent upon a number of mechanisms, including 
self-accelerating positive feedback loops.
A possible model for pneumonia is as follows. An inflammatory 
event resulting in epithelial and or endothelial injury results in the 
release of cytokines, chemokines, and catecholamines, some of which 
may selectively promote the growth of certain bacteria, such as Strep
tococcus pneumoniae and P. aeruginosa. This cycle of inflammation, 
enhanced nutrient availability, and release of potential bacterial growth 
factors may result in a positive feedback loop that further accelerates 
inflammation and the growth of particular bacteria, which may then 
become dominant. In cases of CAP and HAP, the trigger may be a viral 
infection compounded by microaspiration of oropharyngeal organ
isms. In cases of true aspiration pneumonia, the trigger may simply be 
the macroaspiration event itself.
Once triggered, innate and adaptive immune responses can ide
ally help contain potential pathogens and prevent the development 
of pneumonia. However, in the face of continuing inflammation 
(and especially if a positive feedback loop becomes sustainable), the 
process may proceed to a full-fledged pneumonia syndrome. Inflam
matory mediators such as interleukin 6 and tumor necrosis factor 
result in fever, and chemokines such as interleukin 8 and granulocyte 
1009
CHAPTER 126
Pneumonia
DEFINITION
Pneumonia is an infection of the pulmonary parenchyma. Despite sig
nificant morbidity and mortality, it is often misdiagnosed, mistreated, and 
underestimated. Pneumonia has usually been classified as community- 
acquired (CAP), hospital-acquired (HAP), or ventilator-associated 
(VAP). A fourth category, health care–associated pneumonia (HCAP) 
was introduced to encompass cases caused by multidrug-resistant 
(MDR) pathogens typically associated with HAP and cases in unhos
pitalized individuals at risk of MDR infection. Unfortunately, this 
1010
colony-stimulating factor increase local neutrophil numbers. Media
tors released by macrophages and neutrophils may create an alveolar 
capillary leak resulting in impaired oxygenation, hypoxemia, and 
radiographic infiltrates. Moreover, some bacterial pathogens appear 
to interfere with the hypoxic vasoconstriction that would normally 
occur with fluid-filled alveoli, and this interference may result in severe 
hypoxemia. Decreased compliance due to capillary leak, hypoxemia, 
increased respiratory drive, increased secretions, and occasionally 
infection-related bronchospasm all lead to worsening dyspnea. If 
severe enough, changes in lung mechanics secondary to reductions in 
lung volume, compliance, and intrapulmonary shunting of blood may 
cause respiratory failure.
Cardiovascular events with pneumonia, particularly in the elderly 
and usually in association with pneumococcal pneumonia and influ
enza, are increasingly recognized. These events, which may be acute 
or whose occurrence may extend to at least 1 year, include congestive 
heart failure, arrhythmia, myocardial infarction, or stroke and may be 
caused by a variety of mechanisms, including increased myocardial 
load and/or destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques by inflammation. 
In animal models, direct myocardial invasion by pneumococci may 
result in scarring and impaired myocardial function and conductivity.
PATHOLOGY
PART 5
Infectious Diseases
Classic pneumonia evolves through a series of stages. The initial stage 
is edema with a proteinaceous exudate and often bacteria in the alveoli. 
Next is a rapid transition to the red hepatization phase. Erythrocytes 
in the intraalveolar exudate give this stage its name. In the third phase, 
gray hepatization, no new erythrocytes are extravasating, and those 
already present have been lysed and degraded. The neutrophil is the 
predominant cell, fibrin deposition is abundant, and bacteria have 
disappeared. This phase corresponds with the successful containment 
of the infection and improvement in gas exchange. In the final phase, 
resolution, the macrophage reappears as the dominant cell in the alve
olar space and the debris of neutrophils, and bacteria and fibrin have 
been cleared, as has the inflammatory response.
This pattern has been described best for lobar pneumococcal pneu
monia but may not apply to pneumonia of all etiologies. In VAP, respi
ratory bronchiolitis may precede the development of a radiologically 
apparent infiltrate. A bronchopneumonia pattern is most common in 
nosocomial pneumonias, whereas a lobar pattern is more common in 
bacterial CAP. Despite the radiographic appearance, viral and Pneumo
cystis pneumonias represent alveolar rather than interstitial processes.
COMMUNITY-ACQUIRED PNEUMONIA
■ETIOLOGY
The list of potential etiologic agents of CAP includes bacteria, fungi, 
viruses, and protozoa. Newer viral pathogens include metapneumo
viruses, the coronaviruses responsible for severe acute respiratory 
syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), 
and the recently discovered coronavirus that originated in Wuhan, 
China, and is designated SARS-CoV-2. First described in December 
2019, SARS-CoV-2 and its associated clinical disease, COVID-19, have 
reached pandemic proportions and are a cause of significant morbid
ity and mortality. The virus and the disease are discussed in detail in 
Chap. 199.
Although most CAP cases are caused by relatively few pathogens, an 
accurate determination of their prevalence is difficult because labora
tory testing methods are often insensitive and indirect (Table 126-1). 
Separation of potential agents into “typical” bacterial pathogens and 
“atypical” organisms may be helpful. The former group includes S. pneu
moniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and, in selected patients, S. aureus and 
gram-negative bacilli such as Klebsiella pneumoniae and P. aeruginosa. 
The “atypical” organisms include Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia 
pneumoniae, and Legionella species as well as respiratory viruses such 
as influenza virus, adenoviruses, human metapneumoviruses, respi
ratory syncytial virus, and coronaviruses. With the increasing use of 
pneumococcal vaccine, the incidence of pneumococcal pneumonia is 
decreasing. Cases due to M. pneumoniae and C. pneumoniae, however, 
TABLE 126-1 Microbial Causes of Community-Acquired  
Pneumonia, by Site of Care
HOSPITALIZED PATIENTS
OUTPATIENTS
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae
Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
Haemophilus influenzae
C. pneumoniae
NON-ICU
ICU
S. pneumoniae 
Staphylococcus aureus 
Legionella spp.
Gram-negative bacilli
H. influenzae
Respiratory virusesa
S. pneumoniae
M. pneumoniae
Chlamydia pneumoniae
H. influenzae
Legionella spp.
Respiratory virusesa
Respiratory viruses
aInfluenza A and B viruses, human metapneumovirus, adenoviruses, respiratory 
syncytial viruses, parainfluenza viruses, coronaviruses (e.g., SARS-CoV-2).
Abbreviation: ICU, intensive care unit.
appear to be increasing, especially among young adults. Viruses are 
recognized as increasingly important in pneumonia, and polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR)–based testing indicates their presence in the 
respiratory tract of 20–30% of healthy adults and in the same percent
age of pneumonia patients, including those who are severely ill. The 
most common are influenza, parainfluenza, and respiratory syncytial 
viruses. Whether they are true etiologic pathogens, co-pathogens, 
or simply colonizers cannot always be determined. Atypical organ
isms cannot be cultured on standard media or seen on Gram’s stain, 
but their frequency and importance have significant implications  
for therapy. They are intrinsically resistant to all β-lactams and require 
treatment with a macrolide, a fluoroquinolone, or a tetracycline. In 
the 10–15% of CAP cases that are polymicrobial, the etiology usually 
includes a combination of typical and atypical pathogens.
Earlier literature suggested that aspiration pneumonia was caused 
primarily by anaerobes, with or without aerobic pathogens. A shift, 
however, has been noted recently: if aspiration pneumonia is acquired 
in a community or hospital setting, the likely pathogens are those 
usually associated with CAP or HAP. Anaerobes may still play a role, 
especially in patients with poor dentition, lung abscess, necrotizing 
pneumonia, or empyema.
S. aureus pneumonia is known to complicate influenza virus infec
tion. However, MRSA has been reported as a primary etiologic agent 
of CAP. Although cases caused by MRSA are relatively uncommon, 
clinicians must be aware of its potentially serious consequences, such 
as necrotizing pneumonia. Two factors have led to this problem: the 
spread of MRSA from the hospital setting to the community and the 
emergence of genetically distinct strains of MRSA in the community. 
Community-associated MRSA (CA-MRSA) strains may infect healthy 
individuals who have had no association with health care.
Despite a careful history, physical examination, and radiographic 
studies, the causative pathogen is often difficult to predict with 
certainty, and in more than half of cases a specific etiology is not 
determined. Nevertheless, epidemiologic and risk factors may suggest 
certain pathogens (Table 126-2).
■EPIDEMIOLOGY
More than 5 million CAP cases occur annually in the United States. 
Along with influenza, CAP is the eighth leading cause of death in this 
country. CAP causes more than 55,000 deaths annually and results in 
more than 1.2 million hospitalizations; ~70% of patients are treated as 
outpatients and 30% as inpatients. The mortality rate among outpa
tients is usually <5% but ranges from ~12% to 40% among hospitalized 
patients, with the exact rate depending on whether treatment takes 
place in or outside the intensive care unit (ICU). In the United States, 
CAP is the leading cause of death from infection among patients  
>65 years of age. Moreover, 18% of hospitalized CAP patients are 
readmitted within 1 month of discharge. The overall yearly CAP cost is 
estimated at $17 billion. The overall incidence among adults is ~16–23 
cases per 1000 persons per year, with the highest rates at the extremes 
of age.
The risk factors for CAP in general and for pneumococcal pneu
monia in particular have implications for treatment. They include 
TABLE 126-2 Epidemiologic Factors Suggesting Possible Causes of 
Community-Acquired Pneumonia
FACTOR
Alcoholism
COPD and/or smoking
Structural lung disease (e.g., 
bronchiectasis)
Dementia, stroke, decreased
level of consciousness
Lung abscess
Travel to Ohio or St. Lawrence 
river valley
Travel to southwestern
United States
Travel to Southeast Asia
Stay in hotel or on cruise
ship in previous 2 weeks
Local influenza activity
Exposure to infected humans
Exposure to birds
Exposure to rabbits
Exposure to sheep, goats,
 parturient cats
POSSIBLE PATHOGEN(S)
Streptococcus pneumoniae, oral anaerobes, 
Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter spp., 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Haemophilus influenzae, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, Legionella spp., S. pneumoniae, 
Moraxella catarrhalis, Chlamydia pneumoniae
P. aeruginosa, Burkholderia cepacia, 
Staphylococcus aureus
Oral anaerobes, gram-negative enteric bacteria
CA-MRSA, oral anaerobes, endemic fungi,
M. tuberculosis, atypical mycobacteria
Histoplasma capsulatum
Hantavirus, Coccidioides spp.
Burkholderia pseudomallei, avian  
influenza virus
Legionella spp.
Influenza virus, S. pneumoniae, S. aureus
SARS-CoV-2
H. capsulatum, Chlamydia psittaci
Francisella tularensis
Coxiella burnetii
Abbreviations: CA-MRSA, community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; SARS-CoV-2, severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.
alcoholism, asthma, immunosuppression, institutionalization, and age 
>70 years. In the elderly, decreased cough and gag reflexes and reduced 
antibody and Toll-like receptor responses increase the likelihood 
of pneumonia. Risk factors for pneumococcal pneumonia include 
dementia, seizure disorders, heart failure, cerebrovascular disease, 
alcoholism, tobacco smoking, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), and HIV infection. CA-MRSA pneumonia is more likely in 
patients with skin colonization or infection with CA-MRSA and after 
viral infection. Enterobacteriaceae tend to infect patients who have 
recently been hospitalized or given antibiotics or who have comor
bidities such as alcoholism, heart failure, or renal failure. P. aeruginosa 
is a particular problem in patients with severe structural lung disease 
(e.g., bronchiectasis, cystic fibrosis, or severe COPD). Risk factors for 
Legionella infection include diabetes, hematologic malignancy, cancer, 
severe renal disease, HIV infection, smoking, male gender, and a recent 
hotel stay or trip on a cruise ship.
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The clinical presentation of pneumonia can vary from indolent to ful
minant and from mild to fatal in severity. Manifestations of worsening 
severity include both constitutional findings and those limited to the 
lung and associated structures. The patient is frequently febrile and/
or tachycardic and may experience chills and/or sweats. Cough may 
be nonproductive or productive of mucoid, purulent, or blood-tinged 
sputum. Gross hemoptysis is suggestive of necrotizing pneumonia 
(e.g., that due to CA-MRSA). Depending on severity, the patient may 
be able to speak in full sentences or may be short of breath. With pleu
ral involvement, the patient may experience pleuritic chest pain. Up to 
20% of patients may have gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea, 
vomiting, or diarrhea. Other symptoms may include fatigue, headache, 
myalgias, and arthralgias.
Findings on physical examination vary with the degree of pulmo
nary consolidation and the presence or absence of a significant pleural 
effusion. An increased respiratory rate and use of accessory muscles of 
respiration are common. Palpation may reveal increased or decreased 
tactile fremitus, and the percussion note can vary from dull to flat, 
reflecting underlying consolidated lung and pleural fluid, respectively. 
Crackles, bronchial breath sounds, and possibly a pleural friction rub 
may be heard. The clinical presentation may be less obvious in the 
elderly, who may initially display new-onset or worsening confusion 
but few other manifestations. Severely ill patients may have septic 
shock and evidence of organ failure. In cases of CAP, symptoms can 
range from almost nonexistent to severe, and chest radiographic find
ings are often in gravity-dependent parts of the lung.
■DIAGNOSIS
When confronted with possible CAP, the physician must ask two ques
tions: is this pneumonia, and, if so, what is the likely pathogen? The 
former question is answered by clinical and radiographic methods, 
whereas the latter requires laboratory techniques.
Clinical Diagnosis The differential diagnosis includes infectious 
and noninfectious entities, including acute bronchitis, exacerbations 
of chronic bronchitis, heart failure, and pulmonary embolism. The 
importance of a careful history cannot be overemphasized. The diag
nosis of CAP requires a compatible history, such as cough, sputum pro
duction, fever and dyspnea, and a new infiltrate on chest radiography.
Unfortunately, the sensitivity and specificity of findings on physical 
examination are only 58% and 67%, respectively. Chest radiography 
is often necessary to differentiate CAP from other conditions. Radio
graphic findings may suggest increased severity (e.g., cavitation or 
multilobar involvement). Occasionally, radiographic results suggest an 
etiologic diagnosis, such as pneumatoceles in S. aureus infection or an 
upper-lobe cavitating lesion in tuberculosis. CT may be of value in sus
pected loculated effusion or cavitary cases or in postobstructive pneu
monia caused by a tumor or foreign body. For outpatients, clinical and 
radiologic assessments are usually all that is required before treatment 
is started since most laboratory results are not available soon enough to 
influence initial management. In certain cases, the availability of rapid 
point-of-care outpatient tests can be important; for example, rapid 
diagnosis of influenza infection can prompt specific anti-influenza 
treatment and secondary prevention measures.
Etiologic Diagnosis The etiology of pneumonia usually cannot be 
determined solely on the basis of clinical or radiographic presentation. 
Data from more than 17,000 emergency department CAP cases showed 
an etiologic determination in only 7.6%. Except for CAP patients 
admitted to the ICU, no data exist to show that treatment directed at 
a specific pathogen is statistically superior to empirical therapy. The 
benefit of establishing a microbial etiology may be questioned, partic
ularly in light of the cost of diagnostic testing. However, a number of 
reasons exist for attempting an etiologic diagnosis. Identification of a 
specific or unexpected pathogen allows narrowing of the initial empiri
cal regimen, with a consequent decrease in antibiotic selection pressure 
and in the risk of resistance. Pathogens with important public safety 
implications, such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis and influenza virus, 
may be found. Finally, without susceptibility data, trends in resistance 
cannot be followed accurately, and appropriate empirical therapeutic 
regimens are harder to devise.
1011
CHAPTER 126
Pneumonia
GRAM’S STAIN AND CULTURE OF SPUTUM The main purpose of the 
sputum Gram’s stain is to ensure suitability of a specimen for culture. 
(To be suitable, a sputum sample must have >25 neutrophils and <10 
squamous epithelial cells per low-power field.) However, staining may 
also identify certain pathogens (e.g., S. pneumoniae, S. aureus, and 
gram-negative bacteria). The sensitivity and specificity of the sputum 
Gram’s stain and culture are highly variable. Even in cases of proven 
bacteremic pneumococcal pneumonia, the yield of positive cultures 
from sputum is ≤50%.
Many patients, particularly elderly individuals, may be unable to 
produce an appropriate sputum sample. Others may be taking antibi
otics that interfere with culture results. Inability to produce sputum can 
be caused by dehydration, whose correction may result in increased 
1012
sputum production and a more obvious infiltrate on chest radiography. 
For patients admitted to the ICU and intubated, a deep-suction aspirate 
or bronchoalveolar lavage sample has a high yield on culture when sent 
to the laboratory as soon as possible. Since pathogens in severe and 
mild CAP may differ (Table 126-1), the greatest benefit of staining and 
culturing respiratory secretions is to alert the physician to unexpected 
and/or resistant pathogens and to permit appropriate modification of 
therapy. Other stains and cultures (e.g., for M. tuberculosis or fungi) 
may be useful as well. The sputum Gram’s stain and culture are rec
ommended only for hospitalized CAP patients, particularly those with 
severe cases or those with risks of MRSA or P. aeruginosa infection.
BLOOD CULTURES The yield from blood cultures, even when samples 
are collected before antibiotic therapy, is disappointingly low. Only 
5–14% of cultures from hospitalized CAP patients are positive, and 
the most common pathogen is S. pneumoniae. Since recommended 
empirical regimens all provide pneumococcal coverage, a blood culture 
positive for this pathogen has little, if any, effect on clinical outcome. 
However, susceptibility data may allow narrowing of antibiotic therapy 
in appropriate cases. Because of the low yield and the lack of signifi
cant impact on outcome, blood cultures are not considered de rigueur 
for all hospitalized CAP patients. Certain high-risk patients should 
have blood cultured, including those with neutropenia secondary to 
pneumonia, asplenia, complement deficiencies, chronic liver disease, 
or severe CAP and those at risk of MRSA or P. aeruginosa infection.
PART 5
Infectious Diseases
URINARY ANTIGEN TESTS Two commercially available tests detect 
pneumococcal and Legionella antigen in urine. The Legionella pneumo
phila test detects only serogroup 1, which accounts for most community- 
acquired cases of Legionnaires’ disease in the United States. The sensi
tivity and specificity of this antigen test are 70% and 99%, respectively. 
The pneumococcal urine antigen test also is quite sensitive and specific 
(70% and >90%, respectively). Although false-positive results can be 
obtained for pneumococcus-colonized children, the test is generally 
reliable. Both tests can detect antigen even after the initiation of appro
priate antibiotic therapy. Testing of urine for pneumococcal antigen 
can be reserved for severe cases; Legionella antigen can be sought in 
severe cases and in situations where relevant epidemiologic factors are 
present.
POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION PCR tests amplify a microorganism’s 
DNA or RNA, and multiplex PCR panels test for a number of viral and 
bacterial pathogens. These tests dramatically improve response times, 
but the contamination of respiratory specimens by upper-airway flora 
may make semiquantitative or quantitative assays necessary for best 
results. PCR of nasopharyngeal swabs has become the standard for 
diagnosis of respiratory viral infection. PCR can also detect the nucleic 
acid of Legionella species, M. pneumoniae, C. pneumoniae, and myco
bacteria. The cost-effectiveness of PCR testing, however, has not been 
definitively established.
SEROLOGY A fourfold rise in specific IgM antibody titer between 
acute- and convalescent-phase serum samples is generally considered 
diagnostic of infection with a particular pathogen. Until recently, 
serologic tests were used to help identify atypical pathogens as well as 
selected unusual organisms such as Coxiella burnetii. However, these 
tests have fallen out of favor because of the time required to obtain 
a final result for the convalescent-phase sample and the difficulty of 
interpretation.
BIOMARKERS Two of the most commonly used markers are  
C-reactive protein (CRP) and procalcitonin (PCT). Levels of these 
acute-phase reactants increase in the presence of an inflammatory 
response, particularly to bacterial pathogens. Nevertheless, PCT is 
insufficiently accurate for use in the diagnosis of bacterial CAP, and 
initial serum PCT levels should not be used as a basis for withholding 
initial antibiotic treatment. CRP is considered even less sensitive than 
PCT for detecting bacterial pathogens. Thus these tests should not be 
used alone but, in conjunction with findings from the history, physical 
examination, radiography, and laboratory tests, may facilitate antibiotic 
stewardship and appropriate management of seriously ill CAP patients.
TREATMENT
Community-Acquired Pneumonia 
SITE OF CARE
The decision to hospitalize a patient with CAP has considerable 
implications. The cost of inpatient management exceeds that of 
outpatient treatment by a factor of 20, and hospitalization accounts 
for most CAP-related expenditures. However, late admission to 
the ICU is associated with increased mortality rates. The choice 
can be difficult: some patients can be managed at home, while 
others require hospitalization. Tools that objectively assess the 
risk of adverse outcomes, including severe illness and death, can 
help to minimize unnecessary hospital admissions. The two most 
frequently used rules are the Pneumonia Severity Index (PSI), a 
prognostic model that identifies patients at low risk of dying, and 
the CURB-65 criteria, which yield a severity-of-illness score.
To determine the PSI, points are given for 20 variables, includ
ing age, coexisting illness, and abnormal physical and laboratory 
findings. On the basis of the score, patients are assigned to one of 
five classes with these mortality rates: class 1, 0.1%; class 2, 0.6%; 
class 3, 2.8%; class 4, 8.2%; and class 5, 29.2%. Use of the PSI results 
in lower admission rates for class 1 and class 2 patients. Class 3 
patients could ideally be admitted to an observation unit pending 
further decisions.
The CURB-65 criteria include five variables: confusion (C); urea 
>7 mmol/L (U); respiratory rate ≥30/min (R); blood pressure—
systolic ≤90 mmHg or diastolic ≤60 mmHg (B); and an age of  
≥65 years. Patients with a score of 0 (a 30-day mortality rate of 1.5%) 
can be treated as outpatients. With a score of 1 or 2, the patient 
should be hospitalized unless the score is entirely or in part attrib
utable to an age of ≥65 years; in such cases, hospitalization may not 
be necessary. Among patients with scores of ≥3, mortality rates are 
22% overall; these patients may require ICU admission. The PSI 
has greater efficacy than CURB-65 but is more difficult to calculate.
If a patient is unable to maintain oral intake, if compliance 
is thought to be an issue when assessed on the basis of mental 
condition or living situation (e.g., cognitive impairment or home
lessness), or if the patient’s O2
 saturation on room air is <92%, 
hospitalization is necessary. If these considerations do not apply, 
clinical judgment in conjunction with a prediction rule should be 
used to determine the site of care.
Neither PSI nor CURB-65 is accurate in determining the need for 
ICU admission. Patients with septic shock requiring vasopressors or 
with acute respiratory failure requiring intubation and mechanical 
ventilation should be admitted directly to an ICU (Table 126-3), 
and those with three of the nine minor criteria listed in the latter 
table should be admitted to an ICU or a high-level monitoring unit. 
Mortality rates are higher among less ill patients who were admitted 
TABLE 126-3 Criteria for Severe Community-Acquired Pneumonia
Minor criteria
Respiratory rate ≥30 breaths/min
PaO2
/Fio2
 ratio ≤250
Multilobar infiltrates
Confusion/disorientation
Uremia (BUN level ≥20 mg/dL)
Leukopenia (WBC count <4000 cells/μL)
Thrombocytopenia (platelet count <100,000 cells/μL)
Hypothermia (core temperature <36°C)
Hypotension requiring aggressive fluid resuscitation
Major criteria
Respiratory failure requiring invasive mechanical ventilation
Septic shock requiring vasopressors
Abbreviations: BUN, blood urea nitrogen; PaO2
/FiO2
, arterial oxygen pressure/
fraction of inspired oxygen; WBC, white blood cell.
to a medical floor but then deteriorated than among equally ill 
patients initially monitored in the ICU. 
ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE
Antimicrobial resistance is a significant problem that threatens 
to diminish our therapeutic armamentarium. Antibiotic misuse 
results in increased antibiotic selection pressure that can affect 
resistance locally and globally by clonal dissemination. For CAP, 
the main resistance issues currently involve S. pneumoniae and 
CA-MRSA. 
S. pneumoniae In general, pneumococcal resistance to β-lactams 
is acquired by (1) direct DNA incorporation and remodeling of 
penicillin-binding proteins through contact with closely related 
oral commensal bacteria (e.g., viridans group streptococci), (2) the 
process of natural transformation, or (3) mutation of certain genes.
The S. pneumoniae minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) 
breakpoint cutoffs for penicillin in pneumonia are ≤2 μg/mL for 
susceptible, >2–4 μg/mL for intermediate, and ≥8 μg/mL for resis
tant. A change in susceptibility thresholds dramatically decreased 
the proportion of pneumococcal isolates considered nonsus
ceptible. For meningitis, MIC thresholds remain at the former 
lower levels. Fortunately, resistance to penicillin appeared to pla
teau even before the change in MIC thresholds. Of isolates in the  
United States, <20% are resistant to penicillins and <1% to cephalo
sporins. Risk factors for penicillin-resistant pneumococcal infection 
include recent antimicrobial therapy, an age of <2 or >65 years, atten
dance at a day-care center, recent hospitalization, and HIV infection.
In contrast to penicillin resistance, macrolide resistance 
is increasing in S. pneumoniae through several mechanisms.  
Target-site modification caused by ribosomal methylation in 23S 
rRNA encoded by the ermB gene results in high-level resistance 
(MIC, ≥64 μg/mL) to macrolides, lincosamides, and streptogramin 
B–type antibiotics. The efflux mechanism encoded by the mef gene 
(M phenotype) is usually associated with low-level resistance (MIC, 
1–32 μg/mL). These two mechanisms account for ~40% and ~60%, 
respectively, of resistant pneumococcal isolates in the United States. 
High-level resistance to macrolides is more common in Europe, 
whereas lower-level resistance predominates in North America. 
The prevalence of macrolide-resistant S. pneumoniae exceeds 25% 
in some countries; in Canada the prevalence is ~22%, and in the 
United States it exceeds 30%. Much of this resistance is high
level, and failures of treatment may result in such cases. In these 
situations, a macrolide should not be used as empirical monother
apy. Estimates of the prevalence of doxycycline resistance in the  
United States are generally <20%.
The rate of pneumococcal resistance to fluoroquinolones (e.g., 
ciprofloxacin, moxifloxacin, and levofloxacin) is usually <2%. 
Changes can occur in one or both target sites (topoisomerases II 
and IV); these changes are attributable to mutations in the gyrA and 
parC genes, respectively. In addition, an efflux pump may play a role 
in pneumococcal resistance to fluoroquinolones.
Isolates resistant to drugs from three or more antimicrobial 
classes with different mechanisms of action are considered MDR 
strains. The propensity for an association of pneumococcal resis
tance to penicillin with reduced susceptibility to other drugs, such 
as macrolides, tetracyclines, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, is 
of concern. In the United States, 58.9% of penicillin-resistant pneu
mococcal blood isolates are also resistant to macrolides.
The most important risk factor for antibiotic-resistant pneumo
coccal infection is use of a specific antibiotic within the previous  
3 months. A history of prior antibiotic treatment is a critical factor 
in avoiding the use of an inappropriate antibiotic. 
CA-MRSA CAP due to MRSA may be caused by the classic  
hospital-acquired strains or by genotypically and phenotypically 
distinct community-acquired strains. Most infections with the 
former have been acquired either directly or indirectly during 
contact with the health care environment. However, in some hospi
tals, CA-MRSA strains are displacing the classic hospital-acquired 
strains; this change suggests that the newer community-acquired 
strains may be more robust.
Methicillin resistance in S. aureus is determined by the mecA 
gene, which encodes for resistance to all β-lactam drugs. At least five 
staphylococcal chromosomal cassette mec (SCCmec) types have been 
described. The typical hospital-acquired strain usually has a type II or 
III SCCmec element, whereas CA-MRSA has type IV. CA-MRSA iso
lates tend to be less resistant than the older hospital-acquired strains 
and are often susceptible to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, clin
damycin, and tetracycline in addition to vancomycin and linezolid. 
However, the most important distinction is that CA-MRSA strains 
also carry genes for superantigens such as enterotoxins B and C 
and Panton-Valentine leukocidin; the latter is a membrane-tropic 
toxin that can create cytolytic pores in neutrophils, monocytes, and 
macrophages. 
M. pneumoniae Macrolide-resistant M. pneumoniae has been 
reported in a number of countries, including Germany (3%), Japan 
(30%), China (95%), and France and the United States (5–13%). 
Mycoplasma resistance to macrolides is increasing as a result of 
binding-site mutation in domain V of 23S rRNA. 
Gram-Negative Bacilli A detailed discussion of resistance among 
gram-negative bacilli is beyond the scope of this chapter (see Chap. 
161). Fluoroquinolone resistance among community isolates of 
Escherichia coli is increasing. Enterobacter species are typically resis
tant to cephalosporins, and the drugs of choice for use against these 
organisms are usually fluoroquinolones or carbapenems. Similarly, 
when infections due to bacteria producing extended-spectrum 
β-lactamases (ESBLs) are documented or suspected, a carbapenem 
should be considered. 
INITIAL ANTIBIOTIC MANAGEMENT
Since the etiology of CAP is rarely known at the outset of treat
ment, initial therapy is usually empirical and designed to cover 
the likeliest pathogens. In all cases, treatment should be initiated 
as expeditiously as possible. New CAP treatment guidelines in 
the United States have been presented in a joint statement from 
the American Thoracic Society (ATS) and the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America (IDSA). These guidelines consider the likely 
pathogens, risk of antimicrobial resistance, severity of illness, site of 
care, and risk of infection with specific bacteria such as MRSA and 
P. aeruginosa (Fig. 126-1, Tables 126-4 and 126-5). In the figure 
and the tables, the antibiotics are not listed in order of preference.
The approach to treatment of aspiration pneumonia is based 
upon a number of factors, including site of acquisition (community 
Nonsevere
No risk
Prior 
respiratory
isolation
Risk
antibiotics (PO or IV)
±
local validation*
Severe
No risk R
isk
Recent 
hospitalization
and
Prior 
respiratory
isolation
Recent 
hospitalization
and
antibiotics (PO or IV)
±
local validation*
Add treatment
Obtain cultures†
Add treatment
Add treatment
FIGURE 126-1 Algorithm for assessment of inpatient risk of infection with MRSA 
or Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Underlying lung disease (e.g., bronchiectasis or very 
severe COPD) are also risks for P. aeruginosa infection. *Local validation consists of 
information on local prevalence, resistance, and risk factors. †Can also use MRSA 
rapid nasal PCR if available.
1013
CHAPTER 126
Pneumonia
1014
TABLE 126-4 Initial Treatment Strategies for Outpatients with 
Community-Acquired Pneumonia
STATUS
No comorbidities or risk 
factors for antibiotic 
resistancea
With comorbiditiesd ± 
risk factors for antibiotic 
resistancea
STANDARD REGIMEN
Combination therapy with amoxicillin (1 g tid) + 
either a macrolideb or doxycycline (100 mg bid)
Or
Or
Monotherapy with doxycycline (100 mg bid)
Monotherapy with a macrolideb,c
Combination therapy with
amoxicillin/clavulanatee or a cephalosporinf + 
either a macrolideb or doxycycline (100 mg bid)
Or
Monotherapy with a respiratory fluoroquinoloneg
aAntibiotic treatment within the past 3 months or contact with the health care 
system. bAzithromycin (500 mg on day 1, then 250 mg/d for 4 days), clarithromycin 
(500 mg bid), or clarithromycin ER (1000 mg/d). cIf local prevalence of pneumococcal 
resistance is <25%. dIncluding chronic heart, lung, liver, or kidney disease; diabetes 
mellitus; alcoholism; malignancy; or asplenia. e500/125 mg tid or 875/125 mg bid. 
fCefpodoxime (200 mg bid) or cefuroxime (500 mg bid). gLevofloxacin (750 mg/d), 
moxifloxacin (400 mg/d), or gemifloxacin (320 mg/d).
PART 5
Infectious Diseases
vs hospital), normal or abnormal chest radiograph, and additional 
variables such as illness severity, state of dentition, and risk of 
infection with an MDR pathogen. Routine coverage of anaerobes 
is unnecessary unless dentition is poor or there is a lung abscess or 
necrotizing pneumonia.
Our approach to the treatment of CAP (Tables 126-4 and 126-5) 
is very similar to that proposed in the new CAP guidelines with the 
exceptions listed below. 
Outpatients The exceptions to the CAP guidelines that we follow 
in treating patients are:
• We usually initiate coverage that includes atypical organisms as 
well as S. pneumoniae.
• Generally, we do not consider the risk of infection with P. aerug
inosa or MRSA particularly significant in outpatients.
• Prior antibiotic use should include both oral and parenteral agents.
TABLE 126-5 Initial Treatment for Inpatients with or without Risk 
Factors for Infection with MRSA or Pseudomonas aeruginosa
DISEASE SEVERITY, RISK STATUS
Nonsevere
No risk factors
Prior respiratory isolation
Recent hospitalization, antibiotic 
treatment, ± LVf
Severe
No risk factors
REGIMEN
A β-lactama + a macrolideb
or
A respiratory fluoroquinolonec
Add coverage for MRSAd or Pseudomonas 
aeruginosae
Add coverage for MRSAd or P. aeruginosae 
only if cultures are positive
A β-lactama + a macrolideb
or
A β-lactama + respiratory fluoroquinolonec
Prior respiratory isolation
Recent hospitalization, antibiotic 
treatment ± LVf
Add coverage for MRSAd or P. aeruginosae
Add coverage for MRSAd or P. aeruginosae
aAmpicillin-sulbactam (1.5–3 g q6h). bAzithromycin (500 mg/d) or clarithromycin 
(500 mg bid). cLevofloxacin (750 mg/d), moxifloxacin (400 mg/d), or gemifloxacin 
(320 mg/d). dVancomycin (15 mg/kg q12h, with adjustment based on serum levels) 
or linezolid (600 mg q12h). ePiperacillin-tazobactam (4.5 g q6h), cefepime (2 g q8h), 
ceftazidime (2 g q8h), imipenem (500 mg q6h), meropenem (1 g q8h), or aztreonam  
(2 g q8h). fObtain cultures. MRSA rapid nasal PCR can also be used if available.
Abbreviations: LV, local validation (local prevalence, resistance, risk factors); 
MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
Patients are stratified into two groups: those without comorbid
ity or risk factors for antibiotic resistance and those with comor
bidities (e.g., chronic heart, lung, liver, or kidney disease; diabetes; 
alcoholism; malignancy; or asplenia) with or without risk factors 
for resistance (Table 126-4). As a general rule, if patients have been 
treated with a drug from a particular class of antibiotics within the 
previous 3 months, drugs from a different class should be used to 
minimize resistance issues.
For those without comorbidity or resistance risk factors, amoxi
cillin alone or doxycycline is recommended in the recent guidelines. 
Monotherapy with amoxicillin is based on evidence of its efficacy in 
the treatment of hospitalized CAP patients. This recommendation 
is a change from that in the 2007 IDSA/ATS CAP guidelines. As a 
rule, however, we usually tend to initiate treatment that includes 
coverage for S. pneumoniae as well as the atypical pathogens  
(Table 126-4).
Monotherapy with a macrolide is recommended in the new 
guidelines only if there are contraindications to amoxicillin or 
doxycycline and there is documented low risk of macrolide resis
tance (<25%). Otherwise, the treatment of outpatients is quite 
similar to the regimens recommended in the 2007 IDSA/ATS 
guidelines. 
Inpatients Our exceptions to the recommendations in the CAP 
guidelines are:
• As a general rule, when initiating treatment for infection with  
P. aeruginosa, we use double coverage.
• The presence of all three risk factors is not required for drug 
resistance (recent hospitalization, recent oral or IV antibiotic treat
ment, ± local validation) (Fig. 126-1, Table 126-5).
The main considerations for determining initial empirical treat
ment of hospitalized CAP patients are clinical severity and risk fac
tors for infection with drug-resistant pathogens such as MRSA or P. 
aeruginosa. Hospitalization alone is not now considered a significant 
risk factor for these pathogens. Hospitals should collect local data on 
MRSA and P. aeruginosa with regard to prevalence, risk factors for 
infection, and antibiotic susceptibilities. Patients can be categorized 
as having nonsevere or severe CAP (Table 126-3), and those in each 
of these categories may or may not have risk factors for MRSA or P. 
aeruginosa (Fig. 126-1). In the scenarios involving these variables in 
hospitalized CAP patients, empirical treatment for either of these 
pathogens should be added to standard therapy unless a patient’s 
illness is considered nonsevere and the risk factors are recent hos
pitalization and antibiotic treatment ± local validation data (Fig. 
126-1). Depending upon the patient, we may begin treatment in this 
situation and then de-escalate it if appropriate. In such cases, cul
tures should be performed but treatment usually withheld unless the 
culture results or the rapid nasal PCR results for MRSA are positive. 
Nonsevere, No Risk Factors For patients with nonsevere 
infection and no risk factors, treatment should consist of either a 
combination of a β-lactam and a macrolide or monotherapy with a 
respiratory fluoroquinolone (Table 126-5). In the event of contrain
dications to macrolides and fluoroquinolones, a β-lactam together 
with doxycycline may be used. Treatment with a combination of 
a β-lactam and a macrolide or a fluoroquinolone alone results in 
lower mortality than monotherapy with a β-lactam. 
Severe, No Risk Factors Patients with severe infection but 
no risk factors should receive combination therapy with either a 
β-lactam and a macrolide or a β-lactam and a respiratory fluoro
quinolone (Table 126-5). 
Nonsevere and Severe, with Risk Factors To date, there 
are no prediction rules reliably identifying patients who should be 
started empirically on treatment for MRSA or P. aeruginosa. Cur
rent risk factors for infection with these pathogens are hierarchical. 
Prior isolation of these organisms, especially from the respiratory 
tract within the previous year, is a more robust risk factor than 
recent hospitalization and exposure to parenteral antibiotics. For 
P. aeruginosa, underlying lung disease (e.g., bronchiectasis or very 
severe COPD) also is an important risk factor. If MRSA or P. aerug
inosa has been isolated previously, appropriate empirical therapy 
should be started in both severe and nonsevere cases (Table 126-5).  
We prefer linezolid over vancomycin as first-line treatment for 
MRSA because of its inhibition of bacterial exotoxin and its better 
lung penetration. If the organism is not isolated from respiratory 
secretions or blood and/or the nasal or bronchoalveolar lavage PCR 
test for MRSA is negative and the patient is improving at 48 h, treat
ment may be de-escalated to a standard regimen.
If, on the other hand, the risk factors are recent hospitaliza
tion and antibiotic use within the previous 3 months, appropriate 
samples should be obtained for culture, and, in severe cases, 
extended-spectrum treatment for MRSA or P. aeruginosa should 
be initiated. Depending upon the severity of infection, local data 
on P. aeruginosa resistance, and antibiotic use within the previous  
90 days, single- or double-drug coverage should be used.
If two antipseudomonal agents are started, the drugs should not 
be from the same class. Whenever possible, assessment for possible 
de-escalation of therapy is urged. If the patient’s illness is not severe, 
empirical extended treatment should be withheld until culture 
results are available.
Regardless of the site of care, CAP patients testing positive for 
influenza should be given anti-influenza treatment (e.g., oseltami
vir) as well as appropriate antibacterial therapy. Physicians should 
be vigilant about possible superinfection with MRSA.
Although hospitalized patients have traditionally received initial 
therapy by the IV route, some drugs, particularly the fluoroquino
lones, are very well absorbed and may be given orally from the 
outset to select patients. For those initially treated with IV agents, a 
switch to oral treatment is appropriate when the patient can ingest 
and absorb the drugs, is hemodynamically stable, and is showing 
clinical improvement. A 5-day course of treatment is usually suffi
cient for uncomplicated CAP, but longer treatment may be required 
for patients who have not stabilized clinically and for those with 
bacteremia, metastatic infection, or infection with a more virulent 
pathogen such as P. aeruginosa or MRSA. 
ADJUNCTIVE MEASURES
In addition to appropriate antimicrobial therapy, certain adjunctive 
measures should be used. Adequate hydration, oxygen therapy for 
hypoxemia, vasopressor treatment, and assisted ventilation when 
necessary are critical to successful treatment. Routine use of glu
cocorticoids is not recommended for CAP except in patients with 
refractory septic shock. 
FAILURE TO IMPROVE
Patients slow to respond to therapy should be reevaluated at about 
day 3 (sooner if their condition is worsening), with several sce
narios considered. A number of noninfectious conditions mimic 
pneumonia, including pulmonary edema, pulmonary embolism, 
lung carcinoma, radiation and hypersensitivity pneumonitis, and 
connective tissue disease involving the lungs. If the patient truly 
has CAP and empirical treatment is aimed at the correct patho
gen, lack of response may be explained in a number of ways. The 
pathogen may be resistant to the drug selected, or a sequestered 
focus (e.g., lung abscess or empyema) may prevent antibiotic access 
to the pathogen. The patient may be getting the wrong drug or the 
correct drug at the wrong dose or frequency of administration. 
Another possibility is that CAP has been diagnosed correctly but an 
unexpected pathogen (e.g., CA-MRSA, M. tuberculosis, or a fungus) 
is the cause. Nosocomial superinfections—both pulmonary and 
extrapulmonary—are other possible explanations for a hospitalized 
patient’s failure to improve. In all cases of delayed response or wors
ening condition, the patient must be carefully reassessed and appro
priate studies initiated, possibly including CT or bronchoscopy. 
COMPLICATIONS
Complications of severe CAP include respiratory failure, shock and 
multiorgan failure, and exacerbation of comorbid illnesses. Three 
particularly noteworthy conditions are metastatic infection, lung 
abscess, and complicated pleural effusion. Metastatic infection 
(e.g., brain abscess or endocarditis) is unusual and requires a high 
degree of suspicion and a detailed workup for proper treatment. 
Lung abscess may occur in association with aspiration pneumo
nia or with infection caused by pathogens such as CA-MRSA,  
P. aeruginosa, or (rarely) S. pneumoniae. A significant pleural 
effusion should be tapped for both diagnostic and therapeutic pur
poses. If the fluid has a pH <7.2, a glucose level of <2.2 mmol/L, and 
a lactate dehydrogenase concentration of >1000 U/L or if bacteria 
are seen or cultured, drainage is needed. 
FOLLOW-UP
Fever and leukocytosis usually resolve within 2–4 days in other
wise healthy patients with CAP, but physical findings may persist 
longer. Chest radiographic abnormalities are slowest to resolve  
(4–12 weeks), with the speed of clearance depending on the patient’s 
age and underlying lung disease. Patients may be discharged from 
the hospital once their clinical condition, including any comorbid
ity, is stable. The site of residence after discharge (nursing home, 
home with family, home alone) is an important consideration, par
ticularly for elderly patients. For a hospitalized patient, we generally 
recommend a follow-up radiograph ~4–6 weeks later. If relapse or 
recurrence is documented, particularly in the same lung segment, 
the possibility of an underlying neoplasm must be considered. For 
individuals managed as outpatients, routine follow-up chest radiog
raphy is not necessary if they are nonsmokers, if they are otherwise 
well, and if their symptoms resolved within 5–7 days.
■PROGNOSIS
The prognosis depends on the patient’s age, comorbidities, and site of 
treatment (inpatient or outpatient). Young patients without comor
bidity do well and usually recover fully after ~2 weeks. Older patients 
and those with comorbid conditions may take several weeks longer to 
recover fully. The overall mortality rate for the outpatient group is <5%. 
For patients requiring hospitalization, overall mortality ranges from 
12% to 40%, depending on the category of patient and the processes of 
care, particularly the timely administration of appropriate antibiotics.
■PREVENTION
The main preventive measure is vaccination (Chap. 123). Recommen
dations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices should 
be followed for influenza and pneumococcal vaccines.
A pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23) and a protein 
conjugate pneumococcal vaccine (PCV13) are available in the United 
States (Chap. 146). The former contains capsular material from 23 
pneumococcal serotypes; in the latter, capsular polysaccharide from 
13 of the most common pneumococcal pathogens affecting children is 
linked to an immunogenic protein. PCV13 produces T-cell–dependent 
antigens, resulting in long-term immunologic memory. Administration 
of this vaccine to children has led to a decrease in the prevalence of 
antimicrobial-resistant pneumococci and in the incidence of invasive 
pneumococcal disease among both children and adults. However, vac
cination can result in the replacement of vaccine with nonvaccine sero
types, as seen with serotypes 19A and 35B following introduction of the 
original 7-valent conjugate vaccine. PCV13 is also recommended for the 
elderly and for younger immunocompromised patients. Because of an 
increased risk of pneumococcal infection, even among patients without 
obstructive lung disease, smokers should be strongly encouraged to quit.
The influenza vaccine is available in an inactivated or recombinant 
form. During an influenza outbreak, unprotected patients at risk from 
complications should be vaccinated immediately and given chemopro
phylaxis with either oseltamivir or zanamivir for 2 weeks—i.e., until 
vaccine-induced antibody levels are sufficiently high.
VENTILATOR-ASSOCIATED PNEUMONIA
Research on hospital-acquired pneumonia has focused on VAP. How
ever, the same information and principles can also be applied to venti
lated HAP and to non-ICU HAP. Approximately 70% of HAP cases are 
1015
CHAPTER 126
Pneumonia
1016
acquired outside the ICU and 30% in the ICU; the fact that 30% of all 
HAP patients need mechanical ventilation defines ventilated HAP as 
a distinct entity. In non-intubated patients with HAP, an expectorated 
sputum sample is used for microbiologic diagnosis, but results are 
confounded by frequent colonization by oral pathogens. Microbio
logic information in VAP and ventilated HAP is obtained from direct 
access to deep lower respiratory tract samples, which provide reliable 
microbiologic data; however, these samples can also contain colonizing 
pathogens.
■ETIOLOGY
Potential etiologic agents of VAP include both MDR and non- 
MDR bacterial pathogens (Table 126-6). The non-MDR group of  
“core pathogens” is nearly identical to the pathogens found in severe 
CAP (Table 126-1); it is not surprising that such pathogens predomi
nate if VAP develops in the first 5–7 days of the hospital stay. However, 
if patients have other risk factors (particularly prior antibiotic treat
ment), MDR pathogens are a consideration, even early in the hospital 
course. The relative frequency of individual MDR pathogens can vary 
significantly from hospital to hospital and even between different criti
cal care units within the same institution. Most hospitals have problems 
with P. aeruginosa and MRSA, but other MDR pathogens are often 
institution-specific. Less commonly, fungal and viral pathogens cause 
VAP, usually affecting severely immunocompromised patients. Rarely, 
community-associated viruses cause mini-epidemics, usually when 
introduced by ill health care workers.
PART 5
Infectious Diseases
■EPIDEMIOLOGY
Pneumonia is a common complication among patients requiring 
mechanical ventilation. Prevalence estimates vary between 6 and  
52 cases per 100 patients, depending on the population studied. On 
any given day in the ICU, an average of 10% of patients will have  
pneumonia—VAP in the overwhelming majority of cases, although in 
recent years the frequency of this infection is declining as a result of 
effective prevention strategies. The frequency of diagnosis is not static 
but changes with the duration of mechanical ventilation, with the high
est hazard ratio in the first 5 days and a plateau in additional cases (1% 
per day) after ~2 weeks. However, the cumulative rate among patients 
who remain ventilated for as long as 30 days is as high as 70%. These 
rates often do not reflect the recurrence of VAP in the same patient. 
Once a ventilated patient is transferred to a chronic-care facility or to 
home, the incidence of pneumonia drops significantly, especially in 
the absence of other risk factors for pneumonia. However, in chronic 
ventilator units, purulent tracheobronchitis becomes a significant 
issue, often interfering with efforts to wean patients off mechanical 
ventilation (Chap. 302).
Three factors are critical in the pathogenesis of VAP: colonization of 
the oropharynx with pathogenic microorganisms, aspiration of these 
organisms from the oropharynx into the lower respiratory tract, and 
compromise of normal host defense mechanisms. Most risk factors and 
TABLE 126-6 Microbiologic Causes of Ventilator-Associated 
Pneumonia
NON-MDR PATHOGENS
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Other Streptococcus spp.
Haemophilus influenzae
Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus 
aureus
Antibiotic-sensitive 
Enterobacteriaceae
Escherichia coli
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Proteus spp.
Enterobacter spp.
Serratia marcescens
MDR PATHOGENS
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Methicillin-resistant S. aureus
Acinetobacter spp.
Antibiotic-resistant Enterobacteriaceae
ESBL-positive strains
Carbapenem-resistant strains
Legionella pneumophila
Burkholderia cepacia
Aspergillus spp.
Abbreviations: ESBL, extended-spectrum β-lactamase; MDR, multidrug-resistant.
TABLE 126-7 Pathogenic Mechanisms and Corresponding Prevention 
Strategies for Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia
PATHOGENIC MECHANISM
Oropharyngeal colonization with 
pathogenic bacteria
Elimination of normal flora, 
overgrowth by pathogenic bacteria
Large-volume oropharyngeal 
aspiration around time of intubation
Gastroesophageal reflux
Bacterial overgrowth of stomach
Cross-infection from other colonized 
patients
Large-volume aspiration
Ventilator circuit humidification
Microaspiration around endotracheal 
tube
Endotracheal intubation
Prolonged duration of ventilation
PREVENTION STRATEGY
Avoidance of prolonged antibiotic 
courses; consider oral chlorhexidinea
  
Short course of prophylactic antibiotics 
for comatose patientsb
Postpyloric enteral feeding with orally 
placed feeding tubea; avoidance of high 
gastric residuals, prokinetic agents
Avoidance of prophylactic agents 
that raise gastric pHa; selective 
decontamination of digestive tract with 
nonabsorbable antibioticsa
Hand washing, especially with alcohol
based hand rub; intensive infection 
control educationb; isolation; proper 
cleaning of reusable equipment
Endotracheal intubation; rapid
sequence intubation technique; 
avoidance of sedation; decompression 
of small-bowel obstruction
Change ventilator circuits only when 
soiled and with new patient; drain 
ventilator circuit condensate away 
from patient; replace heat moisture 
exchanger every 5–7 days or if soiled 
or malfunctioninga
Noninvasive ventilationb
Daily awakening from sedation,b 
weaning protocolsb
Abnormal swallowing function
Secretions pooled above 
endotracheal tube
Altered lower respiratory host 
defenses
Early percutaneous tracheostomyb
Head of bed elevatedb; continuous 
aspiration of subglottic secretions 
with specialized endotracheal tubeb; 
avoidance of reintubation; minimization 
of sedation and patient transport; 
prophylactic PEEPc of 5–8 cm
Tight glycemic controla; lowering of 
hemoglobin transfusion threshold
aStrategies with negative randomized trials or conflicting results. bStrategies 
demonstrated to be effective in at least one randomized controlled trial. cPositive 
end-expiratory pressure.
their corresponding prevention strategies pertain to one of these three 
factors (Table 126-7).
The most obvious risk factor is the endotracheal tube, which 
bypasses the normal mechanical factors preventing aspiration. While 
the presence of an endotracheal tube may prevent large-volume aspi
ration, microaspiration is actually exacerbated by secretions pooling 
above the cuff. The endotracheal tube and the concomitant need 
for suctioning can damage the tracheal mucosa, thereby facilitating 
tracheal colonization. In addition, pathogenic bacteria can form a 
glycocalyx biofilm on the tube’s surface that protects them from both 
antibiotics and host defenses. The bacteria can also be dislodged during 
suctioning (done preferably with a closed catheter system) and can rei
noculate the trachea, or tiny fragments of a glycocalyx can embolize to 
distal airways, carrying bacteria with them. The ventilator circuit tub
ing can harbor pathogenic organisms that can wash back to the patient 
if manipulated too often; thus circuits are changed only when soiled 
and with each new patient. Heat moisture exchangers are changed 
every 5–7 days or if visibly soiled or malfunctioning.
In a high percentage of critically ill patients, the normal oropharyngeal 
flora is replaced by pathogenic microorganisms. The most important 
risk factors are antibiotic selection pressure, cross-infection from other 
infected/colonized patients or contaminated equipment, severe systemic 
illness, and malnutrition. Of these factors, antibiotic exposure poses the 
greatest risk by far. Pathogens such as P. aeruginosa almost never cause 
infection in patients without prior exposure to antibiotics. The recent 
emphasis on hand hygiene has lowered the cross-infection rate.
Almost all intubated patients experience microaspiration and are 
at least transiently colonized with pathogenic bacteria. However, only 
around one-third of colonized patients develop VAP. Colony counts 
increase to high levels, sometimes days before the development of clini
cal pneumonia; these increases suggest that the final step in VAP devel
opment, independent of aspiration and oropharyngeal colonization, 
is the overwhelming of host defenses by a large bacterial inoculum. 
Severely ill patients with sepsis and trauma appear to enter a state of 
immunoparalysis several days after admission to the ICU—a time that 
corresponds to the greatest risk of developing VAP. The mechanism 
of this immunosuppression is not clear, although hyperglycemia and 
frequent transfusions adversely affect the immune response.
■CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The clinical manifestations of HAP and VAP are nonspecific: fever, 
leukocytosis, increased respiratory secretions, and pulmonary con
solidation on physical examination, along with a new or changing 
radiographic infiltrate. The frequency of abnormal chest radiographs 
before the onset of pneumonia in intubated patients and the limitations 
of portable radiographic technique make interpretation of radiographs 
more difficult than in patients who are not intubated. Other clinical 
features may include tachypnea, tachycardia, worsening oxygenation, 
and increased minute ventilation. Serial changes in oxygenation may 
identify pneumonia earlier than other findings and may also be a 
means to monitor improvement with therapy.
■DIAGNOSIS
No single set of criteria is reliably diagnostic of pneumonia in a ven
tilated patient. The inability to accurately identify such patients com
promises efforts to prevent and treat VAP and even calls into question 
estimates of the impact of VAP on mortality rates.
Application of the clinical criteria typical for CAP consistently results 
in overdiagnosis of VAP, largely because of (1) frequent tracheal colo
nization with pathogenic bacteria in patients with endotracheal tubes, 
(2) multiple alternative causes of radiographic infiltrates in mechani
cally ventilated patients, and (3) the high frequency of other sources of 
fever in critically ill patients. The differential diagnosis of VAP includes 
atypical pulmonary edema, pulmonary contusion, alveolar hemorrhage, 
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and 
pulmonary infarction. Findings of fever and/or leukocytosis may have 
alternative causes, including antibiotic-associated diarrhea, central line
associated infection, sinusitis, urinary tract infection, pancreatitis, and 
drug fever. Conditions mimicking pneumonia are often documented 
in patients in whom VAP has been ruled out by accurate diagnostic 
techniques. Most of these alternative diagnoses do not require antibiotic 
treatment; require antibiotics different from those used to treat VAP 
(fungal or viral pneumonia); or require some additional intervention, 
such as surgical drainage or catheter removal, for optimal management.
This diagnostic dilemma has led to debate and controversy about 
whether a quantitative-culture approach as a means of eliminating 
false-positive clinical diagnoses is superior to a clinical approach 
enhanced by principles learned from quantitative-culture studies. The 
most recent IDSA/ATS guidelines for HAP/VAP give a weak recom
mendation for a clinical approach based on semiquantitative cultures, 
with consideration of the availability of resources, cost, and the avail
ability of expertise. The guidelines acknowledge that the use of a quan
titative approach may result in less antibiotic use, which may be critical 
for antibiotic stewardship in the ICU. Therefore, the approach at each 
institution—or potentially for each patient—should be individualized 
and based on local colonization rates, local diagnostic expertise, and 
recent history of antibiotic therapy.
Quantitative-Culture Approach This method uses quantitative 
cultures of deep respiratory tract samples to distinguish colonization 
from true infection. The more distal in the respiratory tree the diag
nostic sampling, the more specific the results and therefore the lower 
the threshold of growth necessary to diagnose pneumonia and exclude 
colonization. For example, a quantitative endotracheal aspirate yields 
proximal samples, and the diagnostic threshold is 106 cfu/mL. The 
protected specimen brush method, in contrast, collects distal samples 
and has a threshold of 103 cfu/mL. Conversely, sensitivity declines as 
more distal secretions are obtained, especially when they are collected 
blindly (i.e., by a technique other than bronchoscopy). Additional tests 
that may increase the diagnostic yield include Gram’s staining, differ
ential cell counts, staining for intracellular organisms, and detection of 
local protein levels elevated in response to infection.
If the quantitative approach is used, therapy decisions should be 
linked to culture results, with antibiotics withheld until results are 
available unless the patient is critically ill. Studies have documented 
less antibiotic use with this approach than with the clinical approach, 
but the results are less clear if antibiotic decisions are not directly linked 
to culture data. One common limitation of the quantitative approach 
is the use of a new and effective antibiotic agent in the 24–48 h prior 
to sampling, which can lead to false-negative results. With sensitive 
microorganisms, a single antibiotic dose can reduce colony counts 
below the diagnostic threshold. After 3 days, the operating character
istics of the tests improve to the point at which they are equivalent to 
results obtained when no prior antibiotic therapy has been given. Con
versely, colony counts above the diagnostic threshold during antibiotic 
therapy suggest that the current antibiotics are ineffective. In addition, 
quantitative cultures may give results below the diagnostic threshold 
if samples are collected early in the course of infection or if sampling 
is delayed until after an effective host response has reduced bacterial 
counts. Ideally, a specimen should be obtained as soon as pneumonia is 
suspected and before antibiotic therapy is initiated or changed.
Clinical Approach The lack of specificity of a clinical diagnosis 
of VAP has hampered its utility, but this approach has been improved 
by the addition of microbiologic and other laboratory data. Tracheal 
aspirates generally yield at least twice as many potential pathogens as 
quantitative cultures, but the causative pathogen is almost always pres
ent. The absence of bacteria in Gram-stained endotracheal aspirates 
makes pneumonia an unlikely cause of fever or pulmonary infiltrates. 
These findings, coupled with a heightened awareness of the alterna
tive diagnoses possible in patients with suspected VAP, can prevent 
inappropriate antibiotic overtreatment. Furthermore, the absence of 
an MDR pathogen in tracheal aspirate cultures eliminates the need for 
MDR coverage, allowing de-escalation of empirical antibiotic therapy. 
Similarly, with newer and more sensitive molecular diagnostic meth
ods, a suspected MDR pathogen can be eliminated as a therapy target 
if test results are negative. A clinical approach that focuses on careful 
antimicrobial use and de-escalation of therapy after culture results 
become available may have an impact on the avoidance of antimi
crobial overuse and the consideration of alternative sites of infection 
similar to that of a quantitative-culture approach.
1017
CHAPTER 126
Pneumonia
TREATMENT
Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia
Many studies have demonstrated higher mortality rates with the 
delay of initially appropriate empirical antibiotic therapy. The key to 
appropriate antibiotic management of VAP is an appreciation of the 
resistance patterns of the most likely pathogens in a given patient. 
ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE
Because of a higher risk of infection with MDR pathogens  
(Table 126-6), VAP is treated with antibiotics different from 
those used for severe CAP. Antibiotic selection pressure leads to 
the frequent involvement of MDR pathogens by selecting either 
for drug-resistant isolates of common pathogens (MRSA and 
Enterobacteriaceae producing ESBLs or carbapenemases) or for 
intrinsically resistant pathogens (P. aeruginosa and Acinetobacter 
species). Frequent use of β-lactam drugs, especially cephalosporins, 
appears to be the major risk factor for infection with MRSA and 
ESBL-positive strains.
1018
P. aeruginosa can develop resistance to all routinely used anti
biotics, and, even if initially sensitive, P. aeruginosa isolates may 
develop resistance during treatment. Either derepression of resis
tance genes or selection of resistant clones within the large bacterial 
inoculum associated with most pneumonias may be the cause. 
Acinetobacter species, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, and Burk
holderia cepacia are intrinsically resistant to many of the empirical 
antibiotic regimens employed (see below). VAP caused by these 
pathogens emerges during treatment of other infections, and resis
tance is always evident at initial diagnosis. 
EMPIRICAL THERAPY
PART 5
Infectious Diseases
Recommended options for empirical therapy are listed in  
Table 126-8. Treatment should be started once diagnostic specimens 
have been obtained. The major factors in the selection of agents are 
the presence of risk factors for MDR pathogens and the predicted 
risk of death (≤15% is considered low risk). Choices among the vari
ous options listed depend on local patterns of resistance and—a very 
important factor—the patient’s prior antibiotic exposure. Knowledge 
of the local hospital’s—and even the specific ICU’s—antibiogram 
and the local incidence of specific MDR pathogens (e.g., MRSA) is 
critical in selecting appropriate empirical therapy.
The majority of patients without risk factors for MDR infection 
can be treated with a single agent. In fact, mortality is lower with 
a single agent than with combination therapy for those with a low 
mortality risk. Unfortunately, the proportion of patients with no 
MDR risk factors is <10% in some ICUs and is unknown for HAP 
patients. The major difference from CAP is the markedly lower 
incidence of atypical pathogens in VAP; the exception is Legion
ella, which can be a nosocomial pathogen, especially with local 
epidemics due to breakdowns in the treatment of potable water in 
the hospital. The standard recommendation for patients with risk 
factors for MDR infection and a high mortality risk is for three 
antibiotics: two directed at P. aeruginosa and one at MRSA. How
ever, in the absence of septic shock, a single agent may be effective 
for these patients, provided there is a single agent that is likely to 
be effective against at least 90% of the gram-negative pathogens in 
that ICU. Empirical combination therapy enhances the likelihood 
of initially appropriate therapy over that with monotherapy. A 
β-lactam agent provides the greatest coverage, yet even the broadest- 
TABLE 126-8 Empirical Antibiotic Treatment of Hospital-Acquired 
and Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia
NO RISK FACTORS 
FOR RESISTANT 
GRAM-NEGATIVE 
PATHOGEN
RISK FACTORS FOR RESISTANT GRAM-NEGATIVE 
PATHOGENa (CHOOSE ONE FROM EACH COLUMN)
Piperacillin
tazobactam (4.5 g 
IV q6h)
Cefepime (2 g IV 
q8h)
Levofloxacin  
(750 mg IV q24h)
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
(4.5 g IV q6h)
Cefepime (2 g IV q8h)
Ceftazidime (2 g IV q8h)
Imipenem (500 mg IV q6h)
Meropenem (1 g IV q8h)
Amikacin (15–20 mg/kg IV 
q24h)
Gentamicin (5–7 mg/kg IV 
q24h)
Tobramycin (5–7 mg/kg IV 
q24h)
Ciprofloxacin (400 mg IV q8h)
Levofloxacin (750 mg IV q24h)
Colistin (loading dose of 
5 mg/kg IV followed by 
maintenance doses of 2.5 mg × 
[1.5 × CrCl + 30] IV q12h)
Polymyxin B (2.5–3.0 mg/kg 
per day IV in 2 divided doses)
Risk Factors for MRSAb (Add to above)
Linezolid (600 mg IV q12h) or
Adjusted-dose vancomycin (trough level, 15–20 mg/dL)
aPrior antibiotic therapy, prior hospitalization, local antibiogram. bPrior antibiotic 
therapy, prior hospitalization, known MRSA colonization, chronic hemodialysis, 
local documented MRSA pneumonia rate >10% (or local rate unknown).
Abbreviations: CrCl, creatinine clearance rate; MRSA, methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus.
spectrum agent—a carbapenem—still constitutes inappropriate 
initial therapy in up to 10–15% of cases at some centers. The 
emergence of carbapenem resistance at some institutions requires 
the addition of polymyxins to the combination-therapy options. 
A number of emerging agents may modify our approach to ther
apy. New antipseudomonal agents include ceftazidime–avibactam, 
ceftolozane–tazobactam, imipenem–relebactam, and plazomicin. 
Therapy for carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae can consist 
of ceftazidime–avibactam, imipenem–relebactam, or meropenem
vaborbactam, while organisms that produce metallo-β-lactamases 
can be treated with ceftazidime–avibactam or cefiderocol. 
SPECIFIC TREATMENT
Once an etiologic diagnosis is made, broad-spectrum empirical 
therapy can be modified (de-escalated) to specifically address the 
known pathogen. For patients with MDR risk factors, antibiotic 
regimens can be reduced to a single agent in most cases. Only a 
minority of cases require a complete course with two or three drugs. 
A negative tracheal-aspirate culture or growth below the threshold 
for quantitative cultures of samples obtained before any antibiotic 
change strongly suggests that antibiotics should be discontinued 
or that an alternative diagnosis should be pursued. Identification 
of other confirmed or suspected sites of infection may require 
ongoing antibiotic therapy, but the spectrum of pathogens (and the 
corresponding antibiotic choices) may be different from those for 
VAP. A 7- or 8-day course of therapy is just as effective as a 2-week 
course and is associated with less frequent emergence of antibiotic- 
resistant strains. Exceptions include cases in which initial therapy 
is inappropriate or consists of second-line antibiotics and cases 
caused by some more resistant organisms, such as carbapenemase- 
producing Acinetobacter species.
A major controversy regarding specific therapy for VAP con
cerns the need for ongoing combination treatment of Pseudomonas 
pneumonia. No randomized controlled trials have demonstrated a 
benefit of combination therapy with a β-lactam and an aminogly
coside, nor have subgroup analyses in other trials found a survival 
benefit with such a regimen. Combination therapy may have value 
in bacteremic infection with septic shock, but the benefit may last 
for only a few days. The unacceptably high rates of clinical failure 
and death despite combination therapy among patients with VAP 
caused by P. aeruginosa (see “Failure to Improve,” below) indicate 
that better regimens are needed, perhaps including aerosolized 
antibiotics. In most cases of Pseudomonas pneumonia, current 
guidelines recommend against continuing combination therapy 
after the isolate’s microbial susceptibility is known. 
FAILURE TO IMPROVE
Treatment failure is not uncommon in VAP, especially that caused 
by MDR pathogens. VAP caused by MRSA is associated with a 40% 
clinical failure rate when treated with standard-dose vancomycin. 
One proposed but unproven solution is the use of high-dose indi
vidualized treatment, although the risk of renal toxicity increases 
with this strategy. In addition, the MIC of MRSA to vancomycin 
has been increasing, and a high percentage of clinical failures 
occur when the MIC is in the upper range of sensitivity (i.e., 1.5–2 
μg/mL). Linezolid appears to be 15% more efficacious than even 
adjusted-dose vancomycin and is preferred in patients with renal 
insufficiency and those infected with high-MIC isolates of MRSA. 
VAP due to Pseudomonas has a 40–50% failure rate, no matter what 
the regimen. Causes of clinical failure vary with the pathogen(s) 
and the antibiotic(s). Inappropriate initial therapy can usually 
be minimized by use of the recommended combination regimen 
(Table 126-8). However, the emergence of β-lactam resistance dur
ing therapy is an important problem, especially in infection with 
Pseudomonas and Enterobacter species. Recurrent VAP caused by 
the same pathogen is possible because the biofilm on endotracheal 
tubes allows persistence and reintroduction of the microorganism. 
Studies of VAP caused by Pseudomonas show that approximately 
half of recurrent cases are caused by a new strain. Some studies 
have suggested that treatment failure may be less common with 
optimized β-lactam dosing and use of either prolonged or continu
ous infusion therapy.
Treatment failure and its cause are very difficult to determine 
early in the therapeutic course. Pneumonia due to superinfection, 
the presence of extrapulmonary infection, and drug toxicity must 
be considered. Serial quantitative cultures may clarify the microbi
ologic response, but biomarkers such as PCT are of uncertain value 
in this setting. 
COMPLICATIONS
Apart from death, the major complication of VAP is prolongation of 
mechanical ventilation, with corresponding increases in the dura
tion of ICU and hospital stay. In most studies, the common need for 
an additional week of mechanical ventilation resulting from VAP 
justifies aggressive efforts at prevention.
In rare cases, necrotizing pneumonia (e.g., due to P. aeruginosa 
or S. aureus ) can cause significant pulmonary hemorrhage. More 
commonly, necrotizing infections result in the long-term complica
tions of bronchiectasis and parenchymal scarring leading to recur
rent pneumonia. Other long-term complications of pneumonia 
can include long-term oxygen therapy, a catabolic state in a patient 
already nutritionally at risk, the need for prolonged rehabilitation, 
and—in the elderly—an inability to return to independent function 
and the need for nursing home placement. 
FOLLOW-UP
Clinical improvement, if it occurs, is usually evident within  
48–72 h of the initiation of antimicrobial treatment, usually with 
an improvement in oxygenation. Because findings on chest radiog
raphy often worsen initially during treatment, they are less helpful 
than clinical criteria as an indicator of response to therapy.
■PROGNOSIS
VAP is associated with crude mortality rates as high as 50–70%, but the 
real issue is attributable mortality. Many patients with VAP have underly
ing diseases that would result in death even if VAP did not occur. Attrib
utable mortality exceeded 25% in one matched-cohort study, while more 
recent studies have suggested much lower rates. Some variability in VAP 
mortality rates is clearly related to the type of patient and ICU studied. 
VAP in trauma patients is not associated with attributable mortality, pos
sibly because many of the patients were otherwise healthy before being 
injured. The causative pathogen also plays a major role. Generally, MDR 
pathogens are associated with significantly greater attributable mortality 
than non-MDR pathogens. Pneumonia caused by some pathogens (e.g., 
S. maltophilia) is simply a marker for a patient whose immune system is 
so compromised that death is almost inevitable.
■PREVENTION (TABLE 126-7)
Because endotracheal intubation is a risk factor for VAP, the most 
important preventive intervention is to avoid intubation or minimize 
its duration. Successful noninvasive ventilation avoids many of the 
problems associated with endotracheal tubes. Strategies that minimize 
the duration of ventilation through daily holding of sedation and formal 
weaning protocols have also been highly effective in preventing VAP.
Unfortunately, a tradeoff in risks is sometimes necessary. Aggressive 
attempts to extubate early may result in reintubation(s) and increase 
aspiration, posing a risk of VAP. Heavy continuous sedation increases 
VAP risk, but self-extubation because of insufficient sedation is also a 
risk. The tradeoffs also apply to antibiotic therapy. Short-course antibi
otic prophylaxis can decrease the risk of early-onset VAP in comatose 
patients requiring intubation, and data suggest that antibiotics decrease 
VAP rates overall. Conversely, prolonged courses of antibiotics consis
tently increase the risk of MDR VAP; pseudomonal VAP is rare among 
patients who have not recently received antibiotics.
Minimizing microaspiration around the endotracheal tube cuff 
also can prevent VAP. Simply elevating the head of the bed (at least 
30° above horizontal, but preferably 45°) and using specially modified 
endotracheal tubes that allow removal of the secretions pooled above 
the cuff can prevent microaspiration. The risk-to-benefit ratio of trans
porting the patient outside the ICU for diagnostic tests or procedures 
should be carefully considered since VAP rates are increased among 
transported patients.
The role played by overgrowth of the normal bowel flora in the 
stomach—in the presence of elevated gastric pH—in the pathogen
esis of VAP is questionable. Therefore, avoidance of agents that raise 
gastric pH may be relevant only in certain populations, such as liver 
transplant recipients and patients who have undergone other major 
intraabdominal procedures or who have bowel obstruction. MRSA and 
nonfermenters such as P. aeruginosa and Acinetobacter species are not 
normally part of the bowel flora but reside primarily in the nose and 
on the skin, respectively.
In outbreaks of VAP due to specific pathogens, the possibility of a 
breakdown in infection control measures (particularly contamination 
of reusable equipment) should be investigated. Even high rates of 
pathogens that are already common in a particular ICU may result from 
cross-infection. Education and reminders of the need for consistent hand 
washing and other infection-control practices can minimize this risk.
HOSPITAL-ACQUIRED PNEUMONIA
While less well studied than VAP, HAP in non-intubated patients—
both inside and outside the ICU—is similar to VAP. The main dif
ferences are the higher frequency of non-MDR pathogens and the 
generally better underlying host immunity in non-intubated patients. 
The lower frequency of MDR pathogens allows monotherapy in a 
larger proportion of cases of HAP than of VAP. However, the bacteri
ology and outcome of ventilated HAP patients may be very similar to 
those of patients with VAP.
The only pathogens that may be more common in the non-VAP pop
ulation are anaerobes because of a greater risk of macroaspiration and 
the lower oxygen tensions in the lower respiratory tract of these patients. 
Anaerobes usually contribute only to polymicrobial pneumonias, and 
specific therapy targeting anaerobes probably is not needed since many 
of the recommended antibiotics are active against anaerobes.
Diagnosis is even more difficult for HAP in the non-intubated 
patient than for VAP. Lower respiratory tract samples appropriate for 
culture are considerably more difficult to obtain from non-intubated 
patients. Many of the underlying diseases that predispose a patient to 
HAP are also associated with an inability to cough adequately. Since 
blood cultures are infrequently positive (<15% of cases), the majority of 
patients with HAP do not have culture data on which antibiotic mod
ifications can be based, and de-escalation is less likely. Despite these 
difficulties, the better host defenses in non-ICU patients result in lower 
mortality rates than are documented for VAP and for ventilated HAP. 
In addition, the risk of antibiotic failure is lower in HAP.
1019
CHAPTER 126
Pneumonia
GLOBAL IMPACT
From the available data, it is virtually impossible to accurately assess 
the impact of pneumonia from a global perspective. Any differences 
in incidence, disease burden, and costs across different age, ethnic, 
and racial groups are compounded by differences among countries in 
terms of etiologic pathogens, resistance rates, access to health-care and 
diagnostic facilities, and vaccine availability and use.
A standard approach with clearly defined outcome measures is 
needed before the impact of pneumonia can be accurately evaluated. 
However, simple extrapolation from U.S. data for CAP and HAP/
VAP shows that pneumonia has a significant impact on quality of life, 
morbidity, health costs, and mortality rates and that this impact has 
implications for patients and for society as a whole.
Acknowledgment 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of Richard Wunderink, 
MD, to this chapter in the previous edition.
■FURTHER READING
Chastre J et al: Comparison of 8 vs 15 days of antibiotic therapy 
for ventilator-associated pneumonia in adults: A randomized trial. 
JAMA 290:2588, 2003.
1020
Dickson RP et al: Towards an ecology of the lung: New conceptual 
models of pulmonary microbiology and pneumonia pathogenesis. 
Lancet Respir Med 2:238, 2014.
Fagon JY et al: Invasive and noninvasive strategies for management of 
suspected ventilator-associated pneumonia. A randomized trial. Ann 
Intern Med 132:621, 2000.
Jain S et al: Community-acquired pneumonia requiring hospitaliza
tion among U.S. adults. N Engl J Med 373:415, 2015.
Kalil AC et al: Management of adults with hospital-acquired and ven
tilator-associated pneumonia: 2016 clinical practice guidelines by the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America and the American Thoracic 
Society. Clin Infect Dis 63:e61, 2016.
Mandell LA, Niederman MS: Aspiration pneumonia. N Engl J Med 
380:651, 2019.
Mandell LA et al: Infectious Diseases Society of America/ 
American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on the manage
ment of community-acquired pneumonia in adults. Clin Infect Dis 
44(Suppl 2):S27, 2007.
Metlay JP et al: Diagnosis and treatment of adults with community- 
acquired pneumonia. An Official Clinical Practice Guideline of the 
American Thoracic Society and Infectious Diseases Society of America. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 200:e45, 2019.
Shindo Y et al: Risk factors for drug-resistant pathogens in communi
ty-acquired and healthcare-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 188:985, 2013.
Wunderink RG, Waterer GW: Community-acquired pneumonia.  
N Engl J Med 370:541, 2014.
PART 5
Infectious Diseases
127
Lung Abscess
Rebecca M. Baron, Beverly W. Baron,  
Miriam Baron Barshak
gastroesophageal reflux, especially those who spend substantial time in 
the recumbent position.
It is widely thought that colonization of the gingival crevices by 
anaerobic bacteria or microaerophilic streptococci (especially in 
patients with gingivitis and periodontal disease), combined with a risk 
of aspiration, is important in the development of lung abscesses. In 
fact, many physicians consider it extremely rare for lung abscesses to 
develop in the absence of teeth as a nidus for bacterial colonization.
The importance of these risk factors in the development of lung 
abscesses is highlighted by a significant reduction in abscess inci
dence in the late 1940s that coincided with a change in oral surgical 
technique: beginning at that time, these operations were no longer 
performed with the patient in the seated position without a cuffed 
endotracheal tube, and the frequency of perioperative aspiration events 
was thus decreased. In addition, the introduction of penicillin around 
the same time significantly reduced the incidence of and mortality rate 
from lung abscess.
■PATHOGENESIS
Primary Lung Abscesses The development of primary lung 
abscesses is thought to originate when chiefly anaerobic bacteria (as 
well as microaerophilic streptococci) in the gingival crevices are aspi
rated into the lung parenchyma in a susceptible host (Table 127-1). 
Patients who develop primary lung abscesses usually carry an over
whelming burden of aspirated material or are unable to clear the bacte
rial load. Pneumonitis develops initially (exacerbated in part by tissue 
damage caused by gastric acid); then, over a period of 7–14 days, the 
anaerobic bacteria produce parenchymal necrosis and cavitation whose 
extent depends on host–pathogen interaction (Fig. 127-1). Anaerobes 
are thought to produce more extensive tissue necrosis in polymicrobial 
infections in which virulence factors of the various bacteria can act 
synergistically to cause more significant tissue destruction.